labs/gview-server/Answers.md, before:

GView Server Answers
====================

Lab 2
-----

### Answer 1

The following table shows a comparison of the BLAST atlas for both chromosomes.

| Chromosome I                 | Chromosome II                |
|:----------------------------:|:----------------------------:|
| ![lab1a-atlas][lab2-atlas-1] | ![lab1b-atlas][lab2-atlas-2] |

A few differences include:

* Chromosome I is ~3 mbp in length where as Chromosome II is ~1 mbp in length.
* VC-1 on Chromosome I has a small region around position 100 kbp which is missing when compared to 2010EL-1786 and 2010EL-1749.
* Chromosome I contains a number of small gaps missing from all genomes (for example around 2150 kbp).  These correspond to RNA coding regions which were not selected to be displayed in the **Customize Appearance** screen.

Lab 3
-----

### Answer 1

The following table shows a comparison of the BLAST Atlas and pan-genome BLAST Atlas.

| BLAST Atlas                  | Pan-genome BLAST Atlas     |
|:----------------------------:|:--------------------------:|
| ![blast atlas][lab2-atlas-1] | ![pan atlas][lab3-atlas-1] |

The differences between the BLAST Atlas and the Pan-genome BLAST Atlas include:

* Chromosome II of 2010EL-1786 is appended on the end of Chromosome I within the Pan-genome BLAST Atlas.
* There is a small, extra region not found on Chromosome I or II of 2010EL-1786, but that is found on VC-1 that is appended on the end of Chromosome II.

### Answer 2

The following table shows a comparison of the pan-genome BLAST Atlas using both Chromosomes as the seed genome.

| Seed: Chromosome I             | Seed: Chromosome II            |
|:------------------------------:|:------------------------------:|
| ![lab2-atlas-c1][lab3-atlas-1] | ![lab2-atlas-c2][lab3-atlas-2] |

The main difference is with the positions of features on the pan-genome.  Starting with a seed genome of Chromosome II places Chromosome II at the very beginning of the atlas (from position 0 kbp to 1000 kbp).

[lab2-atlas-1]: images/lab1a-atlas.jpg
[lab2-atlas-2]: images/lab1b-atlas.jpg
[lab3-atlas-1]: images/lab2-atlas.jpg
[lab3-atlas-2]: images/lab2-atlas-c2.jpg

Commit message:

Added another question linking up analysis results to orthomcl

labs/gview-server/Answers.md, after:

GView Server Answers
====================

Lab 2
-----

### Answer 1

The following table shows a comparison of the BLAST atlas for both chromosomes.

| Chromosome I                 | Chromosome II                |
|:----------------------------:|:----------------------------:|
| ![lab1a-atlas][lab2-atlas-1] | ![lab1b-atlas][lab2-atlas-2] |

A few differences include:

* Chromosome I is ~3 mbp in length where as Chromosome II is ~1 mbp in length.
* VC-1 on Chromosome I has a small region around position 100 kbp which is missing when compared to 2010EL-1786 and 2010EL-1749.
* Chromosome I contains a number of small gaps missing from all genomes (for example around 2150 kbp).  These correspond to RNA coding regions which were not selected to be displayed in the **Customize Appearance** screen.

Lab 3
-----

### Answer 1

The following table shows a comparison of the BLAST Atlas and pan-genome BLAST Atlas.

| BLAST Atlas                  | Pan-genome BLAST Atlas     |
|:----------------------------:|:--------------------------:|
| ![blast atlas][lab2-atlas-1] | ![pan atlas][lab3-atlas-1] |

The differences between the BLAST Atlas and the Pan-genome BLAST Atlas include:

* Chromosome II of 2010EL-1786 is appended on the end of Chromosome I within the Pan-genome BLAST Atlas.
* There is a small, extra region not found on Chromosome I or II of 2010EL-1786, but that is found on VC-1 that is appended on the end of Chromosome II.

### Answer 2

The following table shows a comparison of the pan-genome BLAST Atlas using both Chromosomes as the seed genome.

| Seed: Chromosome I             | Seed: Chromosome II            |
|:------------------------------:|:------------------------------:|
| ![lab2-atlas-c1][lab3-atlas-1] | ![lab2-atlas-c2][lab3-atlas-2] |

The main difference is with the positions of features on the pan-genome.  Starting with a seed genome of Chromosome II places Chromosome II at the very beginning of the atlas (from position 0 kbp to 1000 kbp).

### Answer 3

1. The 3269 genes that are part of the core genome set from the OrthoMCL analysis correspond to all the places in the pan-genome BLAST Atlas containing coloured blocks in every single slot.  Since most of the BLAST Atlas contains coloured blocks in every slot then both the pan-genome BLAST Atlas and the OrthoMCL analysis appear fairly consistent.

2. This unique region of 74 genes found in every genome except C6706 corresponds to a number of different regions including around 2950 kbp.

[lab2-atlas-1]: images/lab1a-atlas.jpg
[lab2-atlas-2]: images/lab1b-atlas.jpg
[lab3-atlas-1]: images/lab2-atlas.jpg
[lab3-atlas-2]: images/lab2-atlas-c2.jpg
