labs/ffp-phylogeny/Answers.md, before:

Answers
=======

Answer 1
--------

Running ffp with a kmer length of 10, 15, or 20 will generate a more diverse profile for each genome, but at the cost of taking longer to run.  The following table describes the running time and resulting trees.

| K-mer Length | Time (s) | Result                             |
|:------------:|:--------:|:----------------------------------:|
| 5            | 2.7      | ![tree-5.jpg](images/tree-5.jpg)   |
| 10           | 2.7      | ![tree-10.jpg](images/tree-10.jpg) |
| 15           | 5.7      | ![tree-15.jpg](images/tree-15.jpg) |
| 20           | 131      | ![tree-20.jpg](images/tree-20.jpg) |

Notice how the branch lengths are increasing and the genomes are beginning to visibly cluster as the kmer length increases.

Answer 2
--------

| K-mer Length | Time (s) | Result                                     |
|:------------:|:--------:|:------------------------------------------:|
| 5            | 2.9      | ![tree-5-dna.jpg](images/tree-5-dna.jpg)   |
| 10           | 113      | ![tree-10-dna.jpg](images/tree-10-dna.jpg) |

Note: The publication at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2806744/ describes a method for selecting the best parameters and also shows that the trees will converge quickly to a stable solution as the k-mer length increases.  They also describe a method for computing statistical support for the branching order of the major groups.  Also, see the publication http://www.pnas.org/content/108/20/8329.

Answer 3
--------

Constructing the amio acid sequence-based tree can be accomplished with the following.

```bash
$ ffpaa -l 5 annotations/*.faa | ffpcol -a | ffprwn | ffpjsd -p genome_names_faa.txt | ffptree > tree-5-aa.txt
```

This generates a tree that should look similar to below.

![faa tree](images/tree-5-aa.jpg)

Some differences are that the amino acid sequence tree separates some of the branches of the tree a bit more visibly and the branch lengths are quite a bit shorter (especially those between VC-6, VC-10, VC-14, and the rest).

Answer 4
--------

The core feature phylogeny would exclude any regions that are not part of the core genome.  That is, regions where there are gaps in the pan-genome BLAST Atlas.  Some of the larger such regions include:

* ~100 kbp on the pan-genome BLAST Atlas where C6706 has the largest region missing, and VC-10,VC-26,VC-25,VC-15,VC-1 all have smaller gaps.
* ~4000 kbp on the pan-genome BLAST Atlas where C6706 has a large unique region, and VC-10, VC-1 have smaller unique regions.

![pan-genome blast atlas](../gview-server/images/lab4-pangenome-all.jpg)

Commit message:

Added core feature tree to question

labs/ffp-phylogeny/Answers.md, after:

Answers
=======

Answer 1
--------

Running ffp with a kmer length of 10, 15, or 20 will generate a more diverse profile for each genome, but at the cost of taking longer to run.  The following table describes the running time and resulting trees.

| K-mer Length | Time (s) | Result                             |
|:------------:|:--------:|:----------------------------------:|
| 5            | 2.7      | ![tree-5.jpg](images/tree-5.jpg)   |
| 10           | 2.7      | ![tree-10.jpg](images/tree-10.jpg) |
| 15           | 5.7      | ![tree-15.jpg](images/tree-15.jpg) |
| 20           | 131      | ![tree-20.jpg](images/tree-20.jpg) |

Notice how the branch lengths are increasing and the genomes are beginning to visibly cluster as the kmer length increases.

Answer 2
--------

| K-mer Length | Time (s) | Result                                     |
|:------------:|:--------:|:------------------------------------------:|
| 5            | 2.9      | ![tree-5-dna.jpg](images/tree-5-dna.jpg)   |
| 10           | 113      | ![tree-10-dna.jpg](images/tree-10-dna.jpg) |

Note: The publication at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2806744/ describes a method for selecting the best parameters and also shows that the trees will converge quickly to a stable solution as the k-mer length increases.  They also describe a method for computing statistical support for the branching order of the major groups.  Also, see the publication http://www.pnas.org/content/108/20/8329.

Answer 3
--------

Constructing the amio acid sequence-based tree can be accomplished with the following.

```bash
$ ffpaa -l 5 annotations/*.faa | ffpcol -a | ffprwn | ffpjsd -p genome_names_faa.txt | ffptree > tree-5-aa.txt
```

This generates a tree that should look similar to below.

![faa tree](images/tree-5-aa.jpg)

Some differences are that the amino acid sequence tree separates some of the branches of the tree a bit more visibly and the branch lengths are quite a bit shorter (especially those between VC-6, VC-10, VC-14, and the rest).

Answer 4
--------

The core feature tree generated from a k-mer length of 20 looks like.

![core feature 20](images/tree-core-20.jpg)

This core feature phylogeny would exclude any regions that are not part of the core genome.  That is, regions where there are gaps in the pan-genome BLAST Atlas.  Some of the larger such regions include:

* ~100 kbp on the pan-genome BLAST Atlas where C6706 has the largest region missing, and VC-10,VC-26,VC-25,VC-15,VC-1 all have smaller gaps.
* ~4000 kbp on the pan-genome BLAST Atlas where C6706 has a large unique region, and VC-10, VC-1 have smaller unique regions.

![pan-genome blast atlas](../gview-server/images/lab4-pangenome-all.jpg)
