orthomcl-tutorial/READMELargeDataset.md, before:

Ortholog Detection with OrthoMCL
================================

This tutorial covers ortholog detection using [OrthoMCL](http://orthomcl.org/common/downloads/software/v2.0/).  Instead of running all the software for OrthoMCL manually, we will take advantage of the [OrthoMCL Pipeline](https://github.com/apetkau/orthomcl-pipeline) to automate this process.

Tutorial
========

The following steps show how to run OrthoMCL on the larger example set of data and examine some of the results in a Venn Diagram.

Step 1: Obtaining input Data
----------------------------

First we create a directory to contain all the files that will be created from OrthoMCL.  This can be done as follows.

	$ git clone http://gitlab.corefacility.ca/aaron.petkau/microbialinformatics2014.git
	$ cd microbialinformatics2014/orthomcl-tutorial/
	$ ls
	Answers.md  genome-groups-example.jpg  README.md

The input data for OrthoMCL consists of a set of genes.  This can be obtained from:

	$ cp /Course/MI_workshop/day6/annotations-cholera.tar.gz ./
	$ tar -xvvzf annotations-cholera.tar.gz

This will extract the annotated genomes into a directory __annotations/__.  This directory looks as follows:

	$ ls annotations/
	2010EL-1749.faa  2010EL-1786.ffn  2010EL-1798.faa  2011EL-2317.ffn  3554-08.faa  C6706.ffn  VC-14.faa  VC-15.ffn  VC-19.faa  VC-1.ffn   VC-26.faa  VC-6.ffn
	2010EL-1749.ffn  2010EL-1796.faa  2010EL-1798.ffn  2012V-1001.faa   3554-08.ffn  VC-10.faa  VC-14.ffn  VC-18.faa  VC-19.ffn  VC-25.faa  VC-26.ffn
	2010EL-1786.faa  2010EL-1796.ffn  2011EL-2317.faa  2012V-1001.ffn   C6706.faa    VC-10.ffn  VC-15.faa  VC-18.ffn  VC-1.faa   VC-25.ffn  VC-6.faa

The files __*.faa__ contains the genes as amino acid sequences.  The files __*.ffn__ contain the genes as nucleotide sequences.  For example:

	$ head annotations/2010EL-1749.faa
	>2010EL-1749_00001 Stalked cell differentiation-controlling protein
	MDARLFDNTQTLRASVLCGLSFFWALIAFLMALINFWSTRLVELASLELVCAFYSLYIYS
	LAKRRIHTKQQVYLYLFILTGTTLFATYMKPLMMGVYIWSCFVPILFYIFTSARFAFVTS
	...

	$ head annotations/2010EL-1749.ffn
	>2010EL-1749_00001 Stalked cell differentiation-controlling protein
	ATGGATGCTAGGTTATTTGACAATACACAAACGCTTCGAGCTTCAGTGCTATGCGGCCTA
	AGTTTCTTTTGGGCTTTGATCGCTTTCTTGATGGCGCTGATCAATTTCTGGTCAACACGG
	...

Step 2: Setup OrthoMCL Database Configuration
---------------------------------------------

OrthoMCL requires the use of a database, such as [MySQL](http://www.mysql.com/), to do some of the analysis.  This requires a bit of manual setup, but a lot of this has been done for you.  A configuration file with information on how to connect to the database still needs to be generated.  This can be done with the following command:

	$ /opt/orthomcl-pipeline/scripts/setup_database.pl --user orthomcl --password orthomcl --host localhost --database orthomcl > orthomcl.conf
	Connecting to database orthomcl on host localhost with user orthomcl ...OK

This generates a file, __orthomcl.conf__ which contains the neccessary database connection information and some default settings for OrthoMCL.  This file looks as follows.

	coOrthologTable=CoOrtholog
	dbConnectString=dbi:mysql:orthomcl:localhost:mysql_local_infile=1
	dbLogin=orthomcl
	dbPassword=orthomcl
	dbVendor=mysql 
	evalueExponentCutoff=-5
	inParalogTable=InParalog
	interTaxonMatchView=InterTaxonMatch
	oracleIndexTblSpc=NONE
	orthologTable=Ortholog
	percentMatchCutoff=50
	similarSequencesTable=SimilarSequences

For a more detailed description of this file please see the [OrthoMCL](http://orthomcl.org/common/downloads/software/v2.0/UserGuide.txt) documentation.

For more details on how to setup and install the OrthoMCL Pipeline please see the [install](https://github.com/apetkau/orthomcl-pipeline/blob/master/INSTALL.md) documentation.

Step 3: Renaming input files
----------------------------

The OrthoMCL Pipeline takes as input the __*.faa__ amino acid sequence files, but assumes its input files end with the __*.fasta__ extension.  To properly rename these files please use the following command.

	$ prename 's/\.faa/\.fasta/' annotations/*.faa

This rename all the __*.faa__ files within the __annotations/** directory.  These will look like:

	$ ls annotations
	2010EL-1749.fasta  2010EL-1786.ffn    2010EL-1798.fasta  2011EL-2317.ffn   3554-08.fasta  C6706.ffn    VC-14.fasta  VC-15.ffn    VC-19.fasta  VC-1.ffn     VC-26.fasta  VC-6.ffn
	2010EL-1749.ffn    2010EL-1796.fasta  2010EL-1798.ffn    2012V-1001.fasta  3554-08.ffn    VC-10.fasta  VC-14.ffn    VC-18.fasta  VC-19.ffn    VC-25.fasta  VC-26.ffn
	2010EL-1786.fasta  2010EL-1796.ffn    2011EL-2317.fasta  2012V-1001.ffn    C6706.fasta    VC-10.ffn    VC-15.fasta  VC-18.ffn    VC-1.fasta   VC-25.ffn    VC-6.fasta

Step 4: Running OrthoMCL
------------------------

In order to run OrthoMCL please use the following command.

	$ orthomcl-pipeline -i annotations/ -o orthomcl-output -m orthomcl.conf --nocompliant
	Starting OrthoMCL pipeline on: Fri Apr 11 15:39:19 2014
	Git commit: a3999872a160994b9e8eacb95163c24b4dd78bd8
	
	
	=Stage 1: Validate Files =
	...

If you get the message:

	Warning: some tables exist already in database dbi:mysql:orthomcl:localhost:mysql_local_infile, user=orthomcl, database_name=orthomcl. Do you want to remove (y/n)?

Please answer __yes__.  This will simply delete any old results stored in the database so that OrthoMCL can run properly.

When the pipeline is finished you should see the following output.

	Orthomcl Pipeline ended on Fri Apr 11 16:12:02 2014
	Took 19.23 minutes to complete
	Parameters used can be viewed in orthomcl.conf and /home/aaron/Projects/MicrobialInformatics2014/orthomcl-tutorial/orthomcl-output/log/run.properties
	Groups file can be found in /home/aaron/Projects/MicrobialInformatics2014/orthomcl-tutorial/orthomcl-output/groups/groups.txt

Step 5: Example Results
-----------------------

Due to the amount of time it would take to run through this entire data set, we will run through the rest of this lab with a pre-computed set of results.  These results can be copied and extracted with the following commands.

	$ cp /Course/MI_workshop/day6/orthomcl-output-example.tar.gz ./
	$ tar -xvvzf orthomcl-output-example.tar.gz

This will extract the output to a directory named __orthomcl-output-example/__.

Step 6: Looking at the Results
------------------------------

The output directory contains a number of different sub directories, log files, and analysis results.  This looks as follows.

	$ ls orthomcl-output-example/
	blast_dir  blast_load  blast_results  compliant_fasta  groups  log  pairs

The main output from OrthoMCL is a file __orthomcl-output-example/groups/groups.txt__ which contains a list of potential orthologs among the entire input genome set, one set of orthologs per line.  This file looks as follows:

	$ head orthomcl-output-example/groups/groups.txt
	group_1: 2010EL-1749|2010EL-1749_00119 2010EL-1749|2010EL-1749_00120 ...
	group_2: 2010EL-1786|Vch1786_I1650 2010EL-1786|Vch1786_I2818 2010EL-1786|Vch1786_II0608 ...
	group_3: 2010EL-1786|Vch1786_I0915 2010EL-1786|Vch1786_II0814 2010EL-1786|Vch1786_II0916 ...
	...

Each gene within an ortholog group is separated by spaces.  So, for example, group_1 contains the gene `2010EL-1749_00119` from genome __2010EL-1749__ and the gene `2010EL-1749_00120` from genome __2010EL-1749__.

These correspond to the genes:

	$ grep -A1 '2010EL-1749_00119' annotations/2010EL-1749.fasta
	>2010EL-1749_00119 Flagellin D
	MAVNVNTNVAAMTAQRYLTGATNAQQTSMERLSSGFKINSAKDDAAGLQISNRLNVQSRG

	$ grep -A1 '2010EL-1749_00120' annotations/2010EL-1749.fasta
	>2010EL-1749_00120 Flagellin B
	MAINVNTNVSAMTAQRYLNGAADGMQKSMERLSSGYKINSARDDAAGLQISNRLTSQSRG

Notice how both these genes come from the same genome __2010EL-1749__.  This simply means that these two genes passed the cutoff criteria to be considered paralogs.

Step 7: Venn Diagram of Orthologs
---------------------------------

Looking at text files can be useful but sometimes you will want to get an overall picture of the results and make comparisons of genes among different groups of genomes.  This can be accomplished with a script `nml_parse_orthomcl.pl` which will construct a Venn Diagram of the genes in common among a group of genomes.

This script uses the orthomcl results file __orthomcl-output-example/groups/groups.txt__ along with another file defining the sets of genomes to compare.  This file is also called a groups file (which can make it confusing sometimes).  The format is:

__genome-groups.txt:__

	nepal: VC-25,VC-26,VC-14
	haiti: 2010EL-1749,2010EL-1786,2010EL-1796,2010EL-1798,2011EL-2317,2012V-1001,3554-08,VC-10,VC-15,VC-18,VC-19,VC-1,VC-6
	c6706: C6706

An example __genome-groups.txt__ file has been included with the rest of the data for this tutorial.

To run `nml_parse_orthomcl.pl` and generate a Venn Diagram, please do the following:

	$ nml_parse_orthomcl.pl -i orthomcl-output-example/groups/groups.txt -g genome-groups.txt -s --draw -o orthomcl-stats.txt --genes
	
This will generate two main files of interest: an image file named __genome-groups.txt.svg__ and some statistics about the results in __orthomcl-stats.txt__.  A set of other files, all named **group_x.csv** will also be generated.

The image file __genome-groups.txt.svg__ contains a Venn Diagram depeciting the numger of shared genes among the genome groups within the __genome-groups.txt__ file.  This looks as follows:

![genome-groups-example.jpg](genome-groups-example.jpg)\

This shows that there are 3269 genes within the core genome of all genomes analysed.  Between the __nepal__ and __haiti__ group there are 74 unique genes not shared with __c6707__.  There are 4 unique genes to the __haiti__ group and there is 1 unique gene in c6706 not shared among any genomes.

The statistics file __orthomcl-stats.txt__ shows some summary statistics about the OrthoMCL results.  An example of this information is:

```
Genomes not included in group file:


Number of genes seen in the following genomes:

VC-14: 3540
2011EL-2317: 3536
VC-26: 3544
2010EL-1796: 3536
3554-08: 3530
VC-15: 3555
2010EL-1749: 3534
VC-19: 3555
2010EL-1798: 3510
2012V-1001: 3526
VC-1: 3563
C6706: 3440
VC-10: 3563
VC-6: 3547
VC-25: 3541
2010EL-1786: 3576
VC-18: 3557

Total genes seen: 60153

'Core' gene sets that is contained: 17 genomes has 3269 genes
Found 4 for the following set: haiti
2010EL-1749_02114,2010EL-1796_03119,2010EL-1798_02875,2011EL-2317_03311,2012V-1001_01554,3554-08_03049,VC-10_00387,VC-15_00297,VC-18_00534,VC-19_00302,VC-1_00125,VC-6_00154,Vch1786_I0090
2010EL-1749_02115,2010EL-1796_03118,2010EL-1798_02876,2011EL-2317_03310,2012V-1001_01555,3554-08_03050,VC-10_00386,VC-15_00298,VC-18_00533,VC-19_00303,VC-1_00124,VC-6_00155,Vch1786_I0091
2010EL-1749_02116,2010EL-1796_03117,2010EL-1798_02877,2011EL-2317_03309,2012V-1001_01556,3554-08_03051,VC-10_00385,VC-15_00299,VC-18_00532,VC-19_00304,VC-1_00123,VC-6_00156,Vch1786_I0092
2010EL-1749_02118,2010EL-1796_03115,2010EL-1798_02879,2011EL-2317_03307,2012V-1001_01558,3554-08_03053,VC-10_00383,VC-15_00301,VC-18_00530,VC-19_00306,VC-1_00121,VC-6_00158,Vch1786_I0094
Found 1 for the following set: c6706
C6706_01322,C6706_01324
Found 0 for the following set: nepal
Printing out sets that were not explicit named in set file and contain at least one genome identified by user
Found 19 in file 'group_1.csv' for the following set: 2010EL-1749:2010EL-1786:2010EL-1796:2011EL-2317:2012V-1001:3554-08:C6706:VC-1:VC-10:VC-14:VC-15:VC-18:VC-19:VC-25:VC-26:VC-6
...
```

One particular area to pay attention to is the __Genomes not included in group file__ section.  If this section has genomes listed, then these genomes were excluded from the analysis and you may have to adjust the __genomes-groups.txt__ file to include them and re-run `nml_parse_orthomcl.pl`.

Another area to take a look at, right below __'Core' gene sets that is contained:__ contains a list of the gene ids unique to each genome group defined, as well as any other genome groups that weren't considered.  For example, for the set __haiti__ the 4 unique sets of genes are printed within this file.  To view more information about each of these genes, we can use `grep` to search through the input files.  For example, for the first unique set of genes for the __haiti__ group we have the gene id **2010EL-1749_02114**.  To find more information about this gene please run the following.

	$ grep '2010EL-1749_02114' annotations/*.fasta
	annotations/2010EL-1749.fasta:>2010EL-1749_02114 DNA polymerase V subunit UmuC

This shows the product of the gene (as annotated by prokka) and the file it was found within.

Step 8: Genearate Smaller Dataset
---------------------------------

To generate the smaller dataset, the following steps were used.

Copied output groups file from example dataset:

	$ cp orthomcl-output-example/groups/groups.txt ./groups.txt

Modified **groups.txt** file and wrote to **groups-small.txt** to only have 20 core gene groups.

	$ perl -e 'while(<STDIN>){chomp;@a=split(/\s/); print "$_\n" if (@a == 18);}' < groups.txt | head -n 20 > groups-small.txt

Added a few accessory gene groups and fixed up core gene groups within **groups-small.txt**.

Write only the given list of genes to a new set of files under **annotations-small/**.

	$ mkdir annotations-small
	$ cp groups-small.txt annotations-small/
	$ for i in \
	`cat annotations-small/groups-small.txt | cut -f 1 --complement -d ' ' | tr ' ' '\n'|sort -u`;\
	 do echo $i | perl -MBio::SeqIO -e '$seqid=<STDIN>;chomp $seqid; @a=split(/\|/,$seqid); $f=Bio::SeqIO->new(-file=>"<annotations/".$a[0].".fasta"); $o=Bio::SeqIO->new(-file=>">>annotations-small/".$a[0].".faa",-format=>"fasta");while($s = $f->next_seq){if ($s->display_id eq $a[1]){$o->write_seq($s);}}'; \
	done
	$ for i in \
	`cat annotations-small/groups-small.txt | cut -f 1 --complement -d ' ' | tr ' ' '\n'|sort -u`;\
	do echo $i | perl -MBio::SeqIO -e '$seqid=<STDIN>;chomp $seqid; @a=split(/\|/,$seqid); $f=Bio::SeqIO->new(-file=>"<annotations/".$a[0].".ffn"); $o=Bio::SeqIO->new(-file=>">>annotations-small/".$a[0].".ffn",-format=>"fasta");while($s = $f->next_seq){if ($s->display_id eq $a[1]){$o->write_seq($s);}}'; \
	done

Files in annotations-small/ should contain only the subset of genes we want.  The below command compresses these files.

	$ tar -cvzf annotations-cholera-small.tar.gz annotations-small/

Step 9: Generate Examples Large Dataset
---------------------------------------

The following commands were used to generate the large dataset tarball.

	$ mkdir example-large
	$ cp -r annotations example-large/
	$ cp orthomcl-output-example/groups/groups.txt example-large/
	$ tar -cvvzf example-large.tar.gz example-large/

Commit message:

Fixed typo and adjusted wording for larger tutorial in orthomcl

orthomcl-tutorial/READMELargeDataset.md, after:

Ortholog Detection with OrthoMCL
================================

This tutorial covers ortholog detection using [OrthoMCL](http://orthomcl.org/common/downloads/software/v2.0/).  Instead of running all the software for OrthoMCL manually, we will take advantage of the [OrthoMCL Pipeline](https://github.com/apetkau/orthomcl-pipeline) to automate this process.

Tutorial
========

The following steps show how to run OrthoMCL on the larger example set of data and examine some of the results in a Venn Diagram.

Step 1: Obtaining input Data
----------------------------

First we create a directory to contain all the files that will be created from OrthoMCL.  This can be done as follows.

	$ git clone http://gitlab.corefacility.ca/aaron.petkau/microbialinformatics2014.git
	$ cd microbialinformatics2014/orthomcl-tutorial/
	$ ls
	Answers.md  genome-groups-example.jpg  README.md

The input data for OrthoMCL consists of a set of genes.  This can be obtained from:

	$ cp /Course/MI_workshop/day6/annotations-cholera.tar.gz ./
	$ tar -xvvzf annotations-cholera.tar.gz

This will extract the annotated genomes into a directory __annotations/__.  This directory looks as follows:

	$ ls annotations/
	2010EL-1749.faa  2010EL-1786.ffn  2010EL-1798.faa  2011EL-2317.ffn  3554-08.faa  C6706.ffn  VC-14.faa  VC-15.ffn  VC-19.faa  VC-1.ffn   VC-26.faa  VC-6.ffn
	2010EL-1749.ffn  2010EL-1796.faa  2010EL-1798.ffn  2012V-1001.faa   3554-08.ffn  VC-10.faa  VC-14.ffn  VC-18.faa  VC-19.ffn  VC-25.faa  VC-26.ffn
	2010EL-1786.faa  2010EL-1796.ffn  2011EL-2317.faa  2012V-1001.ffn   C6706.faa    VC-10.ffn  VC-15.faa  VC-18.ffn  VC-1.faa   VC-25.ffn  VC-6.faa

The files __*.faa__ contains the genes as amino acid sequences.  The files __*.ffn__ contain the genes as nucleotide sequences.  For example:

	$ head annotations/2010EL-1749.faa
	>2010EL-1749_00001 Stalked cell differentiation-controlling protein
	MDARLFDNTQTLRASVLCGLSFFWALIAFLMALINFWSTRLVELASLELVCAFYSLYIYS
	LAKRRIHTKQQVYLYLFILTGTTLFATYMKPLMMGVYIWSCFVPILFYIFTSARFAFVTS
	...

	$ head annotations/2010EL-1749.ffn
	>2010EL-1749_00001 Stalked cell differentiation-controlling protein
	ATGGATGCTAGGTTATTTGACAATACACAAACGCTTCGAGCTTCAGTGCTATGCGGCCTA
	AGTTTCTTTTGGGCTTTGATCGCTTTCTTGATGGCGCTGATCAATTTCTGGTCAACACGG
	...

Step 2: Setup OrthoMCL Database Configuration
---------------------------------------------

OrthoMCL requires the use of a database, such as [MySQL](http://www.mysql.com/), to do some of the analysis.  This requires a bit of manual setup.  For more information on setup please see **Step 2: Database Preparation** from the [main tutorial](README.md).  To generate a configuration file with information on how to connect to the database please run the following command.

	$ /opt/orthomcl-pipeline/scripts/setup_database.pl --user orthomcl --password password --host localhost --database orthomcl > orthomcl.conf
	Connecting to database orthomcl on host localhost with user orthomcl ...OK

This generates a file, __orthomcl.conf__ which contains the neccessary database connection information and some default settings for OrthoMCL.  This file looks as follows.

	coOrthologTable=CoOrtholog
	dbConnectString=dbi:mysql:orthomcl:localhost:mysql_local_infile=1
	dbLogin=orthomcl
	dbPassword=password
	dbVendor=mysql 
	evalueExponentCutoff=-5
	inParalogTable=InParalog
	interTaxonMatchView=InterTaxonMatch
	oracleIndexTblSpc=NONE
	orthologTable=Ortholog
	percentMatchCutoff=50
	similarSequencesTable=SimilarSequences

For a more detailed description of this file please see the [OrthoMCL](http://orthomcl.org/common/downloads/software/v2.0/UserGuide.txt) documentation.

For more details on how to setup and install the OrthoMCL Pipeline please see the [install](https://github.com/apetkau/orthomcl-pipeline/blob/master/INSTALL.md) documentation.

Step 3: Renaming input files
----------------------------

The OrthoMCL Pipeline takes as input the __*.faa__ amino acid sequence files, but assumes its input files end with the __*.fasta__ extension.  To properly rename these files please use the following command.

	$ prename 's/\.faa/\.fasta/' annotations/*.faa

This rename all the __*.faa__ files within the __annotations/** directory.  These will look like:

	$ ls annotations
	2010EL-1749.fasta  2010EL-1786.ffn    2010EL-1798.fasta  2011EL-2317.ffn   3554-08.fasta  C6706.ffn    VC-14.fasta  VC-15.ffn    VC-19.fasta  VC-1.ffn     VC-26.fasta  VC-6.ffn
	2010EL-1749.ffn    2010EL-1796.fasta  2010EL-1798.ffn    2012V-1001.fasta  3554-08.ffn    VC-10.fasta  VC-14.ffn    VC-18.fasta  VC-19.ffn    VC-25.fasta  VC-26.ffn
	2010EL-1786.fasta  2010EL-1796.ffn    2011EL-2317.fasta  2012V-1001.ffn    C6706.fasta    VC-10.ffn    VC-15.fasta  VC-18.ffn    VC-1.fasta   VC-25.ffn    VC-6.fasta

Step 4: Running OrthoMCL
------------------------

In order to run OrthoMCL please use the following command.

	$ orthomcl-pipeline -i annotations/ -o orthomcl-output -m orthomcl.conf --nocompliant
	Starting OrthoMCL pipeline on: Fri Apr 11 15:39:19 2014
	Git commit: a3999872a160994b9e8eacb95163c24b4dd78bd8
	
	
	=Stage 1: Validate Files =
	...

If you get the message:

	Warning: some tables exist already in database dbi:mysql:orthomcl:localhost:mysql_local_infile, user=orthomcl, database_name=orthomcl. Do you want to remove (y/n)?

Please answer __yes__.  This will simply delete any old results stored in the database so that OrthoMCL can run properly.

When the pipeline is finished you should see the following output.

	Orthomcl Pipeline ended on Fri Apr 11 16:12:02 2014
	Took 19.23 minutes to complete
	Parameters used can be viewed in orthomcl.conf and /home/aaron/Projects/MicrobialInformatics2014/orthomcl-tutorial/orthomcl-output/log/run.properties
	Groups file can be found in /home/aaron/Projects/MicrobialInformatics2014/orthomcl-tutorial/orthomcl-output/groups/groups.txt

Step 5: Example Results
-----------------------

Due to the amount of time it would take to run through this entire data set, we will run through the rest of this lab with a pre-computed set of results.  These results can be copied and extracted with the following commands.

	$ cp /Course/MI_workshop/day6/orthomcl-output-example.tar.gz ./
	$ tar -xvvzf orthomcl-output-example.tar.gz

This will extract the output to a directory named __orthomcl-output-example/__.

Step 6: Looking at the Results
------------------------------

The output directory contains a number of different sub directories, log files, and analysis results.  This looks as follows.

	$ ls orthomcl-output-example/
	blast_dir  blast_load  blast_results  compliant_fasta  groups  log  pairs

The main output from OrthoMCL is a file __orthomcl-output-example/groups/groups.txt__ which contains a list of potential orthologs among the entire input genome set, one set of orthologs per line.  This file looks as follows:

	$ head orthomcl-output-example/groups/groups.txt
	group_1: 2010EL-1749|2010EL-1749_00119 2010EL-1749|2010EL-1749_00120 ...
	group_2: 2010EL-1786|Vch1786_I1650 2010EL-1786|Vch1786_I2818 2010EL-1786|Vch1786_II0608 ...
	group_3: 2010EL-1786|Vch1786_I0915 2010EL-1786|Vch1786_II0814 2010EL-1786|Vch1786_II0916 ...
	...

Each gene within an ortholog group is separated by spaces.  So, for example, group_1 contains the gene `2010EL-1749_00119` from genome __2010EL-1749__ and the gene `2010EL-1749_00120` from genome __2010EL-1749__.

These correspond to the genes:

	$ grep -A1 '2010EL-1749_00119' annotations/2010EL-1749.fasta
	>2010EL-1749_00119 Flagellin D
	MAVNVNTNVAAMTAQRYLTGATNAQQTSMERLSSGFKINSAKDDAAGLQISNRLNVQSRG

	$ grep -A1 '2010EL-1749_00120' annotations/2010EL-1749.fasta
	>2010EL-1749_00120 Flagellin B
	MAINVNTNVSAMTAQRYLNGAADGMQKSMERLSSGYKINSARDDAAGLQISNRLTSQSRG

Notice how both these genes come from the same genome __2010EL-1749__.  This simply means that these two genes passed the cutoff criteria to be considered paralogs.

Step 7: Venn Diagram of Orthologs
---------------------------------

Looking at text files can be useful but sometimes you will want to get an overall picture of the results and make comparisons of genes among different groups of genomes.  This can be accomplished with a script `nml_parse_orthomcl.pl` which will construct a Venn Diagram of the genes in common among a group of genomes.

This script uses the orthomcl results file __orthomcl-output-example/groups/groups.txt__ along with another file defining the sets of genomes to compare.  This file is also called a groups file (which can make it confusing sometimes).  The format is:

__genome-groups.txt:__

	nepal: VC-25,VC-26,VC-14
	haiti: 2010EL-1749,2010EL-1786,2010EL-1796,2010EL-1798,2011EL-2317,2012V-1001,3554-08,VC-10,VC-15,VC-18,VC-19,VC-1,VC-6
	c6706: C6706

An example __genome-groups.txt__ file has been included with the rest of the data for this tutorial.

To run `nml_parse_orthomcl.pl` and generate a Venn Diagram, please do the following:

	$ nml_parse_orthomcl.pl -i orthomcl-output-example/groups/groups.txt -g genome-groups.txt -s --draw -o orthomcl-stats.txt --genes
	
This will generate two main files of interest: an image file named __genome-groups.txt.svg__ and some statistics about the results in __orthomcl-stats.txt__.  A set of other files, all named **group_x.csv** will also be generated.

The image file __genome-groups.txt.svg__ contains a Venn Diagram depeciting the numger of shared genes among the genome groups within the __genome-groups.txt__ file.  This looks as follows:

![genome-groups-example.jpg](genome-groups-example.jpg)\

This shows that there are 3269 genes within the core genome of all genomes analysed.  Between the __nepal__ and __haiti__ group there are 74 unique genes not shared with __c6707__.  There are 4 unique genes to the __haiti__ group and there is 1 unique gene in c6706 not shared among any genomes.

The statistics file __orthomcl-stats.txt__ shows some summary statistics about the OrthoMCL results.  An example of this information is:

```
Genomes not included in group file:


Number of genes seen in the following genomes:

VC-14: 3540
2011EL-2317: 3536
VC-26: 3544
2010EL-1796: 3536
3554-08: 3530
VC-15: 3555
2010EL-1749: 3534
VC-19: 3555
2010EL-1798: 3510
2012V-1001: 3526
VC-1: 3563
C6706: 3440
VC-10: 3563
VC-6: 3547
VC-25: 3541
2010EL-1786: 3576
VC-18: 3557

Total genes seen: 60153

'Core' gene sets that is contained: 17 genomes has 3269 genes
Found 4 for the following set: haiti
2010EL-1749_02114,2010EL-1796_03119,2010EL-1798_02875,2011EL-2317_03311,2012V-1001_01554,3554-08_03049,VC-10_00387,VC-15_00297,VC-18_00534,VC-19_00302,VC-1_00125,VC-6_00154,Vch1786_I0090
2010EL-1749_02115,2010EL-1796_03118,2010EL-1798_02876,2011EL-2317_03310,2012V-1001_01555,3554-08_03050,VC-10_00386,VC-15_00298,VC-18_00533,VC-19_00303,VC-1_00124,VC-6_00155,Vch1786_I0091
2010EL-1749_02116,2010EL-1796_03117,2010EL-1798_02877,2011EL-2317_03309,2012V-1001_01556,3554-08_03051,VC-10_00385,VC-15_00299,VC-18_00532,VC-19_00304,VC-1_00123,VC-6_00156,Vch1786_I0092
2010EL-1749_02118,2010EL-1796_03115,2010EL-1798_02879,2011EL-2317_03307,2012V-1001_01558,3554-08_03053,VC-10_00383,VC-15_00301,VC-18_00530,VC-19_00306,VC-1_00121,VC-6_00158,Vch1786_I0094
Found 1 for the following set: c6706
C6706_01322,C6706_01324
Found 0 for the following set: nepal
Printing out sets that were not explicit named in set file and contain at least one genome identified by user
Found 19 in file 'group_1.csv' for the following set: 2010EL-1749:2010EL-1786:2010EL-1796:2011EL-2317:2012V-1001:3554-08:C6706:VC-1:VC-10:VC-14:VC-15:VC-18:VC-19:VC-25:VC-26:VC-6
...
```

One particular area to pay attention to is the __Genomes not included in group file__ section.  If this section has genomes listed, then these genomes were excluded from the analysis and you may have to adjust the __genomes-groups.txt__ file to include them and re-run `nml_parse_orthomcl.pl`.

Another area to take a look at, right below __'Core' gene sets that is contained:__ contains a list of the gene ids unique to each genome group defined, as well as any other genome groups that weren't considered.  For example, for the set __haiti__ the 4 unique sets of genes are printed within this file.  To view more information about each of these genes, we can use `grep` to search through the input files.  For example, for the first unique set of genes for the __haiti__ group we have the gene id **2010EL-1749_02114**.  To find more information about this gene please run the following.

	$ grep '2010EL-1749_02114' annotations/*.fasta
	annotations/2010EL-1749.fasta:>2010EL-1749_02114 DNA polymerase V subunit UmuC

This shows the product of the gene (as annotated by prokka) and the file it was found within.

Step 8: Genearate Smaller Dataset
---------------------------------

To generate the smaller dataset, the following steps were used.

Copied output groups file from example dataset:

	$ cp orthomcl-output-example/groups/groups.txt ./groups.txt

Modified **groups.txt** file and wrote to **groups-small.txt** to only have 20 core gene groups.

	$ perl -e 'while(<STDIN>){chomp;@a=split(/\s/); print "$_\n" if (@a == 18);}' < groups.txt | head -n 20 > groups-small.txt

Added a few accessory gene groups and fixed up core gene groups within **groups-small.txt**.

Write only the given list of genes to a new set of files under **annotations-small/**.

	$ mkdir annotations-small
	$ cp groups-small.txt annotations-small/
	$ for i in \
	`cat annotations-small/groups-small.txt | cut -f 1 --complement -d ' ' | tr ' ' '\n'|sort -u`;\
	 do echo $i | perl -MBio::SeqIO -e '$seqid=<STDIN>;chomp $seqid; @a=split(/\|/,$seqid); $f=Bio::SeqIO->new(-file=>"<annotations/".$a[0].".fasta"); $o=Bio::SeqIO->new(-file=>">>annotations-small/".$a[0].".faa",-format=>"fasta");while($s = $f->next_seq){if ($s->display_id eq $a[1]){$o->write_seq($s);}}'; \
	done
	$ for i in \
	`cat annotations-small/groups-small.txt | cut -f 1 --complement -d ' ' | tr ' ' '\n'|sort -u`;\
	do echo $i | perl -MBio::SeqIO -e '$seqid=<STDIN>;chomp $seqid; @a=split(/\|/,$seqid); $f=Bio::SeqIO->new(-file=>"<annotations/".$a[0].".ffn"); $o=Bio::SeqIO->new(-file=>">>annotations-small/".$a[0].".ffn",-format=>"fasta");while($s = $f->next_seq){if ($s->display_id eq $a[1]){$o->write_seq($s);}}'; \
	done

Files in annotations-small/ should contain only the subset of genes we want.  The below command compresses these files.

	$ tar -cvzf annotations-cholera-small.tar.gz annotations-small/

Step 9: Generate Examples Large Dataset
---------------------------------------

The following commands were used to generate the large dataset tarball.

	$ mkdir example-large
	$ cp -r annotations example-large/
	$ cp orthomcl-output-example/groups/groups.txt example-large/
	$ tar -cvvzf example-large.tar.gz example-large/
