labs/mst/README.md, before:

Minimum Spanning Tree and goeBURST with PHYLOViZ
================================================

Introduction
============

[PHYLOViZ](phyloviz) is a desktop application for performing analysis on sequence-based typing data (such as MLST, MLVA, or SNP data).  PHYLOViZ can calculate possible evolutionary relationships by using the [goeBURST][goeburst] algorithm and provides an interface for visualization of the results.  More information on phyloviz can be found at http://www.phyloviz.net/ and a short presentation introducing goeBURST can be found at [PHYLOViZ goeBURST Presentation][mst-phyloviz-intro].

Tutorial
========

This tutorial will go through constructing a minimum spanning tree from SNP, MLST, and other typing data.  The software we will use for constructing these trees is [PHYLOViZ](http://www.phyloviz.net).

Constructing a Working Directory
--------------------------------

To construct a working directory and obtain a copy of these instructions the following commands can be used.

	$ git clone https://github.com/apetkau/microbial-informatics-2014.git
	$ cd microbial-informatics-2014/labs/mst/
	$ ls
	Answers.md  lab1-snp-profile.tsv  PrepareInput.md  sampleADfile.txt
	images      lab1-snp-strains.tsv  README.md        sampleAPfile.txt

Starting Phyloviz
-----------------

In order to start PHYLOViZ the following command can be entered in a terminal.

	$ phyloviz

This should launch PHYLOViZ which should look similar to the following.

![images/phyloviz-start.jpg](images/phyloviz-start.jpg)

Lab 1: Minimum Spanning Tree with SNP Data
------------------------------------------

This lab will walk you through building a minimum spanning tree using SNP data.  The SNP data we will be using was generated using the methods described in the tutorial on [Core SNP Phylogenies](https://github.com/apetkau/microbial-informatics-2014/tree/master/labs/core-snp).  In particular, the input file is the __pseudoalign-positions.tsv__ file, which was taken through the steps described at in [PrepareInput.md](PrepareInput.md).

Please follow the below steps to generate a minimum spanning tree.

### Step 1: Load Dataset

1. Click on **File > Load Dataset**

2. Name this dataset *Lab1*.  Set the **Dataset Type** to *SNP*.  When finished, click Next.  This should bring you to a **Typing Data** screen that looks similar to the following.

   ![lab1-typing.jpg](images/lab1-typing.jpg)

3. Click on **Browse...** and find the file *microbialinformatics2014/labs/mst/lab1-snp-profile.tsv*.  This file contains a set of sequence types (in column *ST*) defined based on the SNP data at different positions.  Click **Next** to continue.  This file looks similar to the following.

	```	
	ST  gi|360034408|ref|NC_016445.1|_17885  gi|360034408|ref|NC_016445.1|_28297
	1   T                                    A
	2   T                                    A
	3   T                                    A
	```
	
   The screen you should see looks similar to the following.

   ![lab1-isolate.jpg](images/lab1-isolate.jpg)

4. Click on **Browse...** and find the file *lab1-snp-strains.tsv*.  This file contains a mapping of the sequence types (in column *ST*) to strain ids.  Please make sure that the **Key** drop down menu is set to *ST* to indicate that this column contains the sequence types.  Click **Finish** to finish loading the data.  The file that was loaded looks similar to below.
	
	```
	ST  Strain
	1   2010EL-1786
	2   2010EL-1749
	3   2010EL-1796
	```
	
### Step 2: Examine Data

1. At the top-left in the **Datasets** panel you should see a *Lab1* tree item.  Click on this tree item to expand it.

   ![lab1-data.jpg](images/lab1-data.jpg)

2. Double-click on **Isolate Data**.  This will display the isolate data from the *lab1-snp-strains.tsv* in a table.

3. Double-click on **Single-Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP)**.  This will display the SNP profile data from the *lab1-snp-profile.tsv* file in a table.

### Step 3: Run goeBURST

1. Right-click on the **Single-Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP)** in the **Datasets** panel.  From here you should see an option to **Compute**.  Within the **Compute** menu click on **goeBURST Full MST**.  This should bring up a window that looks like the following.

   ![lab1-goeburst-full-mst.jpg](images/lab1-goeburst-full-mst.jpg)

2. Make sure the **Distance** is set to *goeBURST Distance* and click **Finish**.

3. In the **Datasets** panel you should see a new item **goeBURST Full MST**.  If you do not see this item you may have to expand **Single-Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP)**.

   ![lab1-goeburst-dataset.jpg](images/lab1-goeburst-dataset.jpg)

### Step 4: View Results

1. Double-click on the **goeBURST Full MST** item in the **Datasets** panel.  This should open up a new tab on the right showing the minimum spanning tree.  You may have to click and drag (left-mouse) or zoom in or out (right-mouse-button) to get a good view.

2. You can adjust the quality of the image by clicking on the **Options** button and selecting *High Quality*.  You can also turn on the display of SNP distances between nodes in the tree by clicking on **Options** and selecting *Level labels*.  When finished you should see something similar to below.

   ![lab1-mst.jpg](images/lab1-mst.jpg)

### Step 5: Visualizing Data

1. Double-click on the **Isolate Data** item under the **Datasets** panel to the left.  This should bring up a table of the isolate data that was loaded from the **lab1-snp-strains.tsv** file.

2. We can select which categories of data to annotate on the minimum spanning tree from this view.  To annotate the *Location* data on to the minimum spanning tree, select all rows from the *Location* column.  Click on the **View** button at the top right.  This should display a pie chart giving a breakdown of the locations at the bottom.

   ![lab1-visualizing-location.jpg](images/lab1-visualizing-location.jpg)

3. Double-click on the **goeBURST Full MST** item in the **Datasets** panel.  This should bring you back to the minimum spanning tree view.  This should now be colored based on the location of each sequence type.

   ![lab1-mst-location.jpg](images/lab1-mst-location.jpg)

### Questions

1. Using a similar procedure as in *Step 5* annotate the minimum spanning tree with the year of collection instead of the location.  Which is the most common year represented?  Which is the least common year?

2. The *Level* selection can be used to define the maximum level nodes can be connected to be part of the same tree.  For the figure we generated, this can be interpreted as the maximum SNP distance to be considered part of the same group or cluster.  Adjust the level to 20 and to 15.   Which are the main isolates that are left out at each level cutoff?

[Answers](Answers.md)

Lab 2: MLST Data in PHYLOViZ
----------------------------

### Step 1: Load Dataset

1. Click on **File > Load Dataset**.
2. Name this dataset *Lab2*.  Set the Dataset Type to *MLST*.  When finished, click Next.
3. Click on **Browse ...** and find the file *microbialinformatics2014/labs/mst/sampleAPfile.txt*.  This file contains a set of sequence types (in column ST) and the allelic profile data used to define that type.  The contents of the file look as below.

```
ST	gki	gtr	murI	mutS	recP	xpt	yqiZ
1	10	6	6	6	12	13	8
2	5	4	4	1	2	15	2
3	5	3	4	1	6	2	1
```

4. Click on **Next** to continue.  This should bring you to a screen that looks like the following.
5. Click on **Browse ...** and find the file *microbialinformatics2014/labs/mst/sampleADfile.txt*.  This file contains data from a number of isolates including the sequence type (stored in column ST).

```
Strain	emm type	Group carbohydrate	ST	Location	Collection
168554	stG485	G	47	Portugal	UL
171712	stG480	G	38	Portugal	UL
220269	stG2078	G	15	Portugal	UL
223754	stC839	C	3	Portugal	UL
230631	stG480	G	8	Portugal	UL
231995	stC74a	G	29	Portugal	UL
```

6. Set the **Key** to be the sequence type (*ST*) column.
7. Click on **Finish** to finish loading the data.

### Step 2: Run goeBURST

1. Right click on the **Multi-Locus Sequence Typing** in the **Datasets** panel (you may have to expand **Lab2**).  From here you should see an option to Compute.  Within the Compute menu, click on **goeBURST**.
2. Use **goeBURST distance** (the only option) for the distance and click on **Next**.  This should bring you to a screen that looks like the following.

   ![goeburst level][lab2-1]

3. Leave the **Level** set to the default (*SLV*).  Click on **Finish** to start the analysis.

### Step 3: Examine Results

1. Once the analysis is complete, another item in the **Lab2** Datasets tree on the right titled *goeBURST (Level 1 ...)** should appear.  Double-click this item to view the goeBURST results.  This should bring up a screen that looks like the following.

   ![goeburst level][lab2-2]

2. Any of the clonal complexes found are displayed in the main window (the number showing the sequence type).  Zooming in and out can be accomplished by right-clicking and dragging the mouse.  Different nodes in the graph can be dragged around to change the placement.
3. The **Groups at...** panel shows a list of all the independent clonal groups found.  Clicking on an entry will display a different group.
4. The **Options** button gives a number of different options.  In particular, selecting *High Quality* will make the image look nicer and selecting **Level Labels** will put the distance labels on each of the edges.

### Questions

1. You should be able to use a similar method as in **Lab 1: Step 5** to visualize associated isolate data on the goeBURST image.  Please do this now for the **Location** data.  Also try this out with the other combinations of data.

2. Re-run the goeBURST algorithm on this data at a *DLV*, *TLV*, and *Full MST* level.  How do the results differ?

[Answers](Answers.md)

[goeburst]: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/10/152
[phyloviz]: http://www.phyloviz.net
[mst-phyloviz-intro]: https://www.corefacility.ca/wiki/pub/BioinformaticsWorkshop/WebHome/Day6LabPetkauPhylovizgeoBURSTMay2014.pdf

[lab2-1]: images/lab2-goeburst-level.jpg
[lab2-2]: images/lab2-goeburst-level1.jpg

Commit message:

Add instructions on resetting table before clicking view and removed unneeded sentance

labs/mst/README.md, after:

Minimum Spanning Tree and goeBURST with PHYLOViZ
================================================

Introduction
============

[PHYLOViZ](phyloviz) is a desktop application for performing analysis on sequence-based typing data (such as MLST, MLVA, or SNP data).  PHYLOViZ can calculate possible evolutionary relationships by using the [goeBURST][goeburst] algorithm and provides an interface for visualization of the results.  More information on phyloviz can be found at http://www.phyloviz.net/ and a short presentation introducing goeBURST can be found at [PHYLOViZ goeBURST Presentation][mst-phyloviz-intro].

Tutorial
========

This tutorial will go through constructing a minimum spanning tree from SNP, MLST, and other typing data.  The software we will use for constructing these trees is [PHYLOViZ](http://www.phyloviz.net).

Constructing a Working Directory
--------------------------------

To construct a working directory and obtain a copy of these instructions the following commands can be used.

	$ git clone https://github.com/apetkau/microbial-informatics-2014.git
	$ cd microbial-informatics-2014/labs/mst/
	$ ls
	Answers.md  lab1-snp-profile.tsv  PrepareInput.md  sampleADfile.txt
	images      lab1-snp-strains.tsv  README.md        sampleAPfile.txt

Starting Phyloviz
-----------------

In order to start PHYLOViZ the following command can be entered in a terminal.

	$ phyloviz

This should launch PHYLOViZ which should look similar to the following.

![images/phyloviz-start.jpg](images/phyloviz-start.jpg)

Lab 1: Minimum Spanning Tree with SNP Data
------------------------------------------

This lab will walk you through building a minimum spanning tree using SNP data.  The SNP data we will be using was generated using the methods described in the tutorial on [Core SNP Phylogenies](https://github.com/apetkau/microbial-informatics-2014/tree/master/labs/core-snp).  In particular, the input file is the __pseudoalign-positions.tsv__ file, which was taken through the steps described at in [PrepareInput.md](PrepareInput.md).

Please follow the below steps to generate a minimum spanning tree.

### Step 1: Load Dataset

1. Click on **File > Load Dataset**

2. Name this dataset *Lab1*.  Set the **Dataset Type** to *SNP*.  When finished, click Next.  This should bring you to a **Typing Data** screen that looks similar to the following.

   ![lab1-typing.jpg](images/lab1-typing.jpg)

3. Click on **Browse...** and find the file *microbialinformatics2014/labs/mst/lab1-snp-profile.tsv*.  This file contains a set of sequence types (in column *ST*) defined based on the SNP data at different positions.  Click **Next** to continue.  This file looks similar to the following.

	```	
	ST  gi|360034408|ref|NC_016445.1|_17885  gi|360034408|ref|NC_016445.1|_28297
	1   T                                    A
	2   T                                    A
	3   T                                    A
	```
	
   The screen you should see looks similar to the following.

   ![lab1-isolate.jpg](images/lab1-isolate.jpg)

4. Click on **Browse...** and find the file *lab1-snp-strains.tsv*.  This file contains a mapping of the sequence types (in column *ST*) to strain ids.  Please make sure that the **Key** drop down menu is set to *ST* to indicate that this column contains the sequence types.  Click **Finish** to finish loading the data.  The file that was loaded looks similar to below.
	
	```
	ST  Strain
	1   2010EL-1786
	2   2010EL-1749
	3   2010EL-1796
	```
	
### Step 2: Examine Data

1. At the top-left in the **Datasets** panel you should see a *Lab1* tree item.  Click on this tree item to expand it.

   ![lab1-data.jpg](images/lab1-data.jpg)

2. Double-click on **Isolate Data**.  This will display the isolate data from the *lab1-snp-strains.tsv* in a table.

3. Double-click on **Single-Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP)**.  This will display the SNP profile data from the *lab1-snp-profile.tsv* file in a table.

### Step 3: Run goeBURST

1. Right-click on the **Single-Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP)** in the **Datasets** panel.  From here you should see an option to **Compute**.  Within the **Compute** menu click on **goeBURST Full MST**.  This should bring up a window that looks like the following.

   ![lab1-goeburst-full-mst.jpg](images/lab1-goeburst-full-mst.jpg)

2. Make sure the **Distance** is set to *goeBURST Distance* and click **Finish**.

3. In the **Datasets** panel you should see a new item **goeBURST Full MST**.  If you do not see this item you may have to expand **Single-Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP)**.

   ![lab1-goeburst-dataset.jpg](images/lab1-goeburst-dataset.jpg)

### Step 4: View Results

1. Double-click on the **goeBURST Full MST** item in the **Datasets** panel.  This should open up a new tab on the right showing the minimum spanning tree.  You may have to click and drag (left-mouse) or zoom in or out (right-mouse-button) to get a good view.

2. You can adjust the quality of the image by clicking on the **Options** button and selecting *High Quality*.  You can also turn on the display of SNP distances between nodes in the tree by clicking on **Options** and selecting *Level labels*.  When finished you should see something similar to below.

   ![lab1-mst.jpg](images/lab1-mst.jpg)

### Step 5: Visualizing Data

1. Double-click on the **Isolate Data** item under the **Datasets** panel to the left.  This should bring up a table of the isolate data that was loaded from the **lab1-snp-strains.tsv** file.

2. We can select which categories of data to annotate on the minimum spanning tree from this view.  To annotate the *Location* data on to the minimum spanning tree, select all rows from the *Location* column.  Click on the **View** button at the top right.  This should display a pie chart giving a breakdown of the locations at the bottom.

   ![lab1-visualizing-location.jpg](images/lab1-visualizing-location.jpg)

3. Double-click on the **goeBURST Full MST** item in the **Datasets** panel.  This should bring you back to the minimum spanning tree view.  This should now be colored based on the location of each sequence type.

   ![lab1-mst-location.jpg](images/lab1-mst-location.jpg)

### Questions

1. Using a similar procedure as in *Step 5* annotate the minimum spanning tree with the year of collection instead of the location.  You will have to reset the selection from the **Isolate Data** table in **Step 5.1** by clicking on the **Reset** button.  Then you can select the **Year** column in the table to view.  Which is the most common year represented?  Which is the least common year?

2. The *Level* selection can be used to define the maximum level nodes can be connected to be part of the same tree.  For the figure we generated, this can be interpreted as the maximum SNP distance to be considered part of the same group or cluster.  Adjust the level to 20 and to 15.   Which are the main isolates that are left out at each level cutoff?

[Answers](Answers.md)

Lab 2: MLST Data in PHYLOViZ
----------------------------

### Step 1: Load Dataset

1. Click on **File > Load Dataset**.
2. Name this dataset *Lab2*.  Set the Dataset Type to *MLST*.  When finished, click Next.
3. Click on **Browse ...** and find the file *microbialinformatics2014/labs/mst/sampleAPfile.txt*.  This file contains a set of sequence types (in column ST) and the allelic profile data used to define that type.  The contents of the file look as below.

```
ST	gki	gtr	murI	mutS	recP	xpt	yqiZ
1	10	6	6	6	12	13	8
2	5	4	4	1	2	15	2
3	5	3	4	1	6	2	1
```

4. Click on **Next** to continue.
5. Click on **Browse ...** and find the file *microbialinformatics2014/labs/mst/sampleADfile.txt*.  This file contains data from a number of isolates including the sequence type (stored in column ST).

```
Strain	emm type	Group carbohydrate	ST	Location	Collection
168554	stG485	G	47	Portugal	UL
171712	stG480	G	38	Portugal	UL
220269	stG2078	G	15	Portugal	UL
223754	stC839	C	3	Portugal	UL
230631	stG480	G	8	Portugal	UL
231995	stC74a	G	29	Portugal	UL
```

6. Set the **Key** to be the sequence type (*ST*) column.
7. Click on **Finish** to finish loading the data.

### Step 2: Run goeBURST

1. Right click on the **Multi-Locus Sequence Typing** in the **Datasets** panel (you may have to expand **Lab2**).  From here you should see an option to Compute.  Within the Compute menu, click on **goeBURST**.
2. Use **goeBURST distance** (the only option) for the distance and click on **Next**.  This should bring you to a screen that looks like the following.

   ![goeburst level][lab2-1]

3. Leave the **Level** set to the default (*SLV*).  Click on **Finish** to start the analysis.

### Step 3: Examine Results

1. Once the analysis is complete, another item in the **Lab2** Datasets tree on the right titled *goeBURST (Level 1 ...)** should appear.  Double-click this item to view the goeBURST results.  This should bring up a screen that looks like the following.

   ![goeburst level][lab2-2]

2. Any of the clonal complexes found are displayed in the main window (the number showing the sequence type).  Zooming in and out can be accomplished by right-clicking and dragging the mouse.  Different nodes in the graph can be dragged around to change the placement.
3. The **Groups at...** panel shows a list of all the independent clonal groups found.  Clicking on an entry will display a different group.
4. The **Options** button gives a number of different options.  In particular, selecting *High Quality* will make the image look nicer and selecting **Level Labels** will put the distance labels on each of the edges.

### Questions

1. You should be able to use a similar method as in **Lab 1: Step 5** to visualize associated isolate data on the goeBURST image.  Please do this now for the **Location** data.  Also try this out with the other combinations of data.

2. Re-run the goeBURST algorithm on this data at a *DLV*, *TLV*, and *Full MST* level.  How do the results differ?

[Answers](Answers.md)

[goeburst]: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2105/10/152
[phyloviz]: http://www.phyloviz.net
[mst-phyloviz-intro]: https://www.corefacility.ca/wiki/pub/BioinformaticsWorkshop/WebHome/Day6LabPetkauPhylovizgeoBURSTMay2014.pdf

[lab2-1]: images/lab2-goeburst-level.jpg
[lab2-2]: images/lab2-goeburst-level1.jpg
